# Introduction To Devops

# 1. What is Devops:

> Devops = Development + Operations

Its a practices aimed at automating and integrating the processes between software development and IT teams.

> Set of practices that automates software development process in order to build, test, release and manage workloads faster and reliably.

**DevOps Pillars:**
- **Automation**: Usage of shell scripting, IaC
- **Cloud Native:** Independent of Cloud Technology
- **Culture:** Culture of communication with concepts of development, management, operation.
- **Security:** Infrastructure security
- **Observability:** Monitoring and reporting

## 2. Core Concepts:

**1. Collaboration And Communications:**

- Breaks down silos between development and operations teams.
- Encourages frequent communication and collaboration.

**2. Continuous Integration and Continuous Delivery (CI/CD):**

- CI => ensures changes on a code are tested and integrated peoperly.

- CD => Automates release process.

**3. Automation:**

- Automates repetitive test => testing, integration, deployment, monitoring, resource creation.

- Tools: Jenkins, Docker, Ansible, Kubernetes, Terraform

**4. Infrastructure as Code (IaC):**

- Infrastructure (networks, servers, ...) creation through code.

- Tools: Terraform, AWS CloudFormation

**5. Monitoring and Feedbacks:**

- Monitoring system and application performance.

- Tools: Promenthus, Grafana, ELK stack for logging and monitoring.

- Data monitored can be used to improve the system and applications.

## 3. Benifits:

- Faster development cycle.
- Reliable and stable release o software product and applications.
- Better resource utilization and scalability.
- Enhanced customer satisfaction through quicker response to market needs.

## 4. Common Tools:

- **Version Control:** Git, GitHub, GitLab, BitBucket
- **CI/CD:** Jenkins, CircleCI, Travis CI, GitLab CI, GitHub Actions**
- **Containerization:** Docker, Kubernetes
- **Configuration Management:** Ansible, Puppet, Chef
- **Cloud Providers:** AWS, Azure, Google Cloud
- **Monitoring and Logging:** Prometheus, Grafana, ELK stack, Nagios

## 5. Conclusion:

Devops is a set of practices that aims to improve collaboration between development and operations teams, automate processes, and integrate infrastructure with code. It helps organizations to deliver faster, more reliable software products and applications.


## Topics That Will Be Covered Further:
- Basic Knowledge of Linux Commands, Bash scripting
- Github Usage
- AWS
- Docker And Kubernetes
- Terraform For Infrastructure as Code
- Jenkins for CI/CD
- Ansible for Configuration Management
- Grafana + Promenthus or **Centreon**
- Python Basic Scripting
