# Uers Permissions

- Defines what action can a user, group can perform in the system.

- Actions modes: ``read`` a file or folder, ``write`` into a file, ``execute`` a script.


## What does `ls -l` gives:

- Long listing of files and folders in current directory.

```bash
<permission> <no_of_hard_link>  <user_owner>  <group_owner> <file_size_in_bytes> <last_modified_date> <last_modified_time> <file_name>
```

```bash
ls -l
drwxrwxr-x 2 test surya 4096 Dec 10 12:33 folder
```

- ``drwxrwxr-x`` => Permission
- ``2`` => Hard Link Number
- ``test`` => Usser owner of file
- ``surya`` => Group owner of file
- ``4099`` => File size in bytes.



## Permissions Representation:

- **Owner Permission:** Defines what a owner can do with.

- **Group Permission:** Defines actions permitted by the group owner of file.

- **Other Users:** Defines actions that can be performed by other than own and a group.

> **Note:** Group owner permission also relates to the actions that can be performed by the user  in the owner group.

**Word Representation:**

- **1st field:** Defines a file type.
     - `-`: Regular file
     - `d`: Directory
     - `l`: [Symbolic link](https://www.freecodecamp.org/news/symlink-tutorial-in-linux-how-to-create-and-remove-a-symbolic-link/), similar to how shortcuts are created in windows.
     - `c`: character device file.
     - `b`: block device file
     - `s`: socket file
     - `p`: Named Pipe (FIFO)
    
- **9 fields representing:**
    - **First 3 field:** For owner
    - **Second 3 field:** For Group
    - **Last 3 field:** For other than group and owner




```bash
ls -l
# drwxrwxr-x 2 test test 4096 Dec 10 12:33 folder
```

- 


Interpretation: ``d rwx rwx r-x``
- `d` represents its'a directory.
- `rwx` represents a user owner can read, write and execute.
- `rwx`represents a group owner can read, write and execute.
- `r-x` represents other user can read and execute but cannot write.

## Changing Permission:

```bash
chmod [options] [permission] [file]
```


**Options include:**
- `-c` gives the message of change after permission change is made.
- `-R` for recursively changing the permissions of the files and folders inside directory.

**Permission Add / Remove with String Representation:**

Basic Syntax: ``chmod [options] <u/g/o><+/-><permission> <file>``

- `u` to change permission for user owner of a file.
- `h` to change the permission for group owner of file.
- `o` to change the permission for other users.
- `+` to add a permission.
- `-` to remove a permission.

- ``chmod u+rwx,g+r,o+r <file>`` => This gives user owner, read write and execute permission, group owner and other user read only permission,

- ``chmod u-x,g-wx,o-rwx <file>`` => This removes the execute permission for user owner, write and execute permissions for group owner, read write and execute permission for other users.

**Permission Add / Remove With NUmeric Representation**

``chmod <user_permission><group_permission><other_permission>``

```sh
4   2   1
r   w   x
```

Binary representation of ``111`` => 7 means read, write and execute.

Permission Digit Can be:
- ``0`` => for no any permission
- ``1`` => Execute permission
- ``2`` => Write Permission
- ``4`` => Read Permission
- `5` => 4 (read) + 1 (execute)
- `7` => 4 (read) + 2 (write) + 1 (execute)

Basically, combinations of permissions are created by summing, `r=4, w=2. x=1`. While `0` representing no permission.

## Example:

**With: String Based Approach**

```bash
#  create a file
touch file.txt

# view perm: User Owner=> rw- Group Owner=> rw- Other=> r--
ls -l
-rw-rw-r-- 1 test test 0 Dec 13 10:28 file.txt

# remove read permission for other, and add execute perm for user and group owner
chmod -c u+x,g+x,o-r file.txt
# mode of 'file.txt' changed from 0664 (rw-rw-r--) to 0770 (rwxrwx---)

# recursive usage
mkdir folder
touch folder/file1.txt
touch folder/file2.txt

# view permissions inside folder directory: User owner => -rw- , Group Owner=>  rw- , Other=> r--
ls -l folder
# -rw-rw-r-- 1 test test 0 Dec 13 10:38 file1.txt
# -rw-rw-r-- 1 test test 0 Dec 13 10:38 file2.txt

# change permission recursively: rwx (111 / 7) for user owner only.
chmod -R 700 folder/

# check changes
ls -l folder/
# -rwx------ 1 test test 0 Dec 13 10:38 file1.txt
# -rwx------ 1 test test 0 Dec 13 10:38 file2.txt
```

**Note: Use ``-c`` flag option to view changes.**